---
layout: post
title: A Burglar's Guide to the City
date: 2016-09-27 22:04:00
---

The boundaries of an idea often require oppositional thinking to uncover. This is very clear in computer security, where you have to “think like a bad guy” to force out the vulnerabilities of a system, whether that means attempting to hack your own code, writing fuzz tests, or publishing proof-of-concepts. [A Burglar’s Guide to the City](https://www.amazon.com/Burglars-Guide-City-Geoff-Manaugh/dp/0374117268) brings this clarification-through-antagonism to the architectural world through the character of the burglar.

A building, and a city, Geoff Manaugh reminds us, guide the movement of people. Burglars subvert this guidance. They climb through vents, reverse engineer fire escapes to tell which floors have luxury apartments, and break through walls, roofs, and floors. They take advantage of the urban environment to rob banks near highways, escape into subways, and use underground sewers to tunnel into banks.

The burglar is elevated to mythical status in this book, and despite all of the stories of bumbling failures, the few successful heists leave a sense of magic that the book doesn’t dispel. Although Manaugh reminds us that burglars are “assholes”, the notion that burglary is a uniquely architectural crime is so strongly stated that it becomes easy to imagine that in a perfect crime, no people are hurt.

At the fringes, though, you get a glimpse of how the fantasy unravels, revealing a pathological and dehumanizing dimension. Roofman, a burglar who earned his nickname for specializing in burglarizing McDonald’s through their roofs, was known for his “politeness” because he would ask employees to wear their jackets before locking them in the freezer. The violence of this is understated in the book. He later escaped from prison and lived behind a partition by a bike rack at a Toys ‘R Us, where
he set up a fantasy headquarters filled with Spiderman paraphernalia and a surveillance station made out of baby cameras. When his perfect heist of Toys ‘R Us was foiled by an off-duty police sheriff, he punched her in the face, and ran away.

