---
layout: post
title: Psychology research - scarcity and defaults
date: 2015-10-10 22:19:00
---

This was one of my two senior psychology research projects at Swarthmore,
which I conducted under the guidance of Prof. Barry Schwartz.

## Abstract

Does being primed with scarcity cause people to choose defaults more
often? Using a computer game to prime scarcity, and a hypothetical company
initiation checklist to evaluate how many options the participant opts
out of, this study shows that people do indeed tend to opt-out less when
they are primed with scarcity.

## Introduction

Researchers and policymakers have begun to devote attention toward
libertarian paternalism, or soft paternalism, as a decision-making
framework that uses psychological methods to encourage groups to make
decisions for the general good, without coercion (Sunstein & Thaler,
2003). This is accomplished via the careful selection of default
options, taking advantage of people's psychological tendency toward
the default. Thus people can be encouraged to become organ donors by
having the option be to opt-out, rather than opt-in (McKenzie, Liersch,
& Finkelstein, 2006).

Having less self-control resources has been shown to affect one's
ability to make these sorts of free-will decisions (Baumeister et
al. 2008). Poverty, in particular, has a variety of negative effects
on cognition, such as having limited cognitive capacity (Mani et al.,
2013), being more prone toward economically undesirable behaviors such as
overborrowing (Shah, Mullainathan, & Shafir, 2012) and failure to enroll
in assistance programs (Bertrand, Mullainathan, & Shafir, 2004). The
question, then, is whether economic scarcity causes people to opt more for
the default. If this is the case, then libertarian paternalistic policies,
will disproportionately affect people currently undergoing money issues,
or are living in poverty.

## Method

This study used the methodology of Mullainathan & Shafir (2013) to prime
scarcity in the lab, specifically, a game they developed called ["Angry
Blueberries"](http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/no-clocking-out/).
In this game, the participant is randomly assigned to one of four
conditions. Two are “scarce” conditions, where the player is
given only three blueberries to shoot per level, and thirty overall,
and two are “rich” conditions, where the player is given fifteen
blueberries per level, and one hundred overall. Within each pair, half of
the participants are assigned to the borrowing condition, where they are
allowed to use more than their allotted number of blueberries per level,
at the cost of twice the number of blueberries from their total. This
is useful if a player wants to attempt to clear a level and earn the
level-clear bonus. The other half are not given the option to borrow
from future levels.

After the game, participants completed an online survey that was framed as
a corporate entry survey, giving the participant eight options to opt-out
of, such as subscription to the company newsletter, and willingness to
work overtime.

## Experiment

Forty subjects were recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk, for $2 payment
each. The average age was 31.3 years, and 19 of the subjects were male,
and 21 were female.

Due to small sample size, the borrowing and not borrowing conditions were
grouped together to form two conditions—scarce, and rich. Participants
were randomly assigned a condition by the game server. The data between
the Angry Blueberries game was matched with the survey results.

A paired t-test revealed that scarce participants (N=24, mean ± SD, 6.5
± 3.04) did not significantly opt-out differently than rich participants
(N=13, 8.46 ± 2.85), with t(47)=-1.60, p=0.12. The possibility existed
that grouping borrowing and non-borrowing groups together affected the
data, so to maximize the possibility of discovering an effect, a second
t-test was performed between the borrowing conditions of both groups. This
was because the scarce-borrowing condition was hypothesized to cause
the most cognitive load, since not only did the player have to mind the
limited ammunition, but also had to mentally consider the possibility
of going “into debt” in order to take risks. The rich-borrowing
condition was hypothesized to be the least cognitively loaded, because
the rich player, distracted and eager to finish the experiment, could
simply shoot mindlessly and waste all 100 blueberries. In this scenario,
a suggestive difference was found between scarce-borrowing (N=16,
6.06 ± 2.98) and rich-borrowing (N=8, 9.25 ± 3.06), with t(24)=-1.92,
p=0.07. The rich-borrowing participants were more likely to opt-out of
more defaults than the scarce-borrowing participants.

## Discussion

The major difficulty of analyzing the data is the small sample
size. Even though the computer generated the conditions evenly, the
participants in the rich condition were much more likely to drop out
of the experiment. Their Angry Blueberry game took much longer, since
they had three times as many blueberries to expend. This resulted in
there being nearly twice as many scarce participants as rich ones, and
could also bias the participants toward those who need the payment more,
or who are less pressed for time.

Another question is whether the scarce condition participants were being
primed with scarcity, or whether the rich condition participants were
being primed with abundance. A control condition where the participant
proceeds directly to the checklist could clarify this.

The results are suggestive, however, and the possibility of people
under scarce conditions “going with the flow” with opt-out forms
is unsurprising, given the research showing how people in poverty fail
to enroll in economic assistance programs (Bertrand et al., 2004). The
question of further research is whether this affects poor people in
serious ways—for example, with legal documents, tax options, or moral
issues such as organ donation.

## References
Baumeister, R. F., Sparks, E. A., Stillman, T. F., & Vohs,
K. D. (2008). Free will in consumer behavior: Self-control, ego
depletion, and choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 18(1),
4–13. doi:10.1016/j.jcps.2007.10.002

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2004). A
Behavioral-Economics View of Poverty. American Economic Review, 94(2),
419–423. doi:10.1257/0002828041302019

Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zhao,
J. (2013). Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function. Science, 341(6149),
976–980. doi:10.1126/science.1238041

McKenzie, C. R. M., Liersch, M. J., & Finkelstein,
S. R. (2006). Recommendations Implicit in Policy Defaults. Psychological
Science, 17(5), 414–420. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01721.x

Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why Having Too Little
Means So Much. Macmillan.

Shah, A. K., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2012). Some
Consequences of Having Too Little. Science, 338(6107),
682–685. doi:10.1126/science.1222426

Sunstein, C. R., & Thaler, R. H. (2003). Libertarian Paternalism
Is Not an Oxymoron. The University of Chicago Law Review, 70(4),
1159–1202. doi:10.2307/1600573
