---
layout: post
title: Psychology research - domestic surveillance and cheating
date: 2015-10-10 21:51:00
tag: psychology
---

This was one of my two senior psychology research projects at Swarthmore,
which I conducted under the guidance of Prof. Barry Schwartz.

People behave better when they think they are being
watched. This effect comes up even with [posters of eyes on the
wall]('http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-the-illusion-of-being-observed-can-make-you-better-person/'),
and when people [think about
god]('http://journals.ama.org/doi/abs/10.1509/jmkr.45.6.633'). The
question is whether this effect extends to the sensation of being watched
under a regime of mass domestic surveillance.

Participants on Mechanical Turk were asked to perform a reading
comprehension task. They were assigned into one of three conditions: an
article excerpting from The Guardian about Edward Snowden and the NSA,
an article about a flood in Indonesia, and the same flood article with
a pair of watchful eyes in the background image.

Then they were asked to complete a task that the participants
were told was for distraction, but in reality was the [matrix
test](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304840904577422090013997320)
developed by Dan Ariely et al. to measure cheating. Participants were
incentivized to cheat by being told that those who found the most pairs of
numbers that added up to ten would be entered into a lottery to receive
an award.

No significant results were found, including for the control group with
the glasses.  That makes me suspect that the electronic format of the experiment did
not test what we expected.  I'd like to rerun this experiment
in a lab, after doing more thorough pre-testing with the stimulus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Abstract

Can being primed to think about the National Security Agency (NSA)
and its widespread domestic surveillance programs lead to changes in
cheating behavior? The experiment lacked a large enough sample size to
tell conclusively, but the data is not suggestive.

## Introduction

Self-consciousness has been shown to cause pro-social behavior. Examples
include hanging up a poster with eyes on it (Bateson, Nettle, & Roberts,
2006) or being primed to think about God (Shariff & Norenzayan, 2007). In
these experiments, participants were led to donate more money into a
collective pot for drinks, act more generously in anonymous economic
games, or littering behavior in a cafeteria (Ernest-Jones, Nettle,
& Bateson, 2011). The question is whether thinking about widespread,
domestic surveillance as being conducted by the NSA causes the same type
of self-consciousness as having a poster of eyes, or thoughts of God.

## Method

The study was presented as a reading comprehension exercise. Participants
were told they would have to read a current events article, participate
in a basic arithmetic contest for a cash prize, and then to answer
reading comprehension questions about the article. To prime participants
with the NSA, an excerpt from a news article was presented as one of
the conditions: “The National Security Agency whistleblower, Edward
Snowden, has said that the mass surveillance programmes used by the
US to tap into phone and internet connections around the world are
making people less safe.  In short video clips posted by the WikiLeaks
website on Friday, Snowden said that the NSA's mass surveillance, which
he disclosed before fleeing to Russia, "puts us at risk of coming into
conflict with our own government".  A US court has charged Snowden with
violating the Espionage Act, for disclosing the programmes which he
described as a "dragnet mass surveillance that puts entire populations
under sort of an eye that sees everything even when it's not needed".
"They hurt our economy. They hurt our country. They limit our ability
to speak and think and live and be creative, to have relationships and
to associate freely," Snowden said.”

Participants were randomly assigned into either receiving the NSA article,
a control article about a typhoon, or into the “eyes condition”,
in which they read the control article and performed the math exercises,
with a pair of eyes in the background (Figure 1).

Then participants were assigned into one of two conditions for the
“arithmetic challenge”. One condition was setup such that the problems
facilitated cheating behavior (the cheating condition), and the other half
did not (the honesty condition). This is the “matrix task” created
by Mazar, Amir, & Ariely (2008). Participants were shown a page with
twenty matrices of numbers, each three by four (Figure 2). Most of the
matrices had pairs of numbers that added up to ten. The participant was
told that the top ten people who found the most pairs of numbers that
added up to ten within a four minute time limit would be entered into
a lottery to win a prize. In the cheating condition, participants were
told to check a box under each matrix for which they found a pair. In
the honesty condition, participants were required to fill in two text
boxes underneath each matrix with the numbers that added up to ten.

After the matrix task, participants were not given a reading comprehension
test, as they had presumed, and were debriefed about the nature of the
experiment, and that the lottery was a fake.

## Experiment

Forty-three participants (M=25, F=18) were recruited on Amazon Mechanical
Turk across two different days. They received $0.50 for completing the
experiment. A participant in the honesty condition was given “0” for
creatively filling in numbers that added up to ten into the text boxes
that were not a part of the matrices.

The matrix paradigm was effective in inducing cheating. A paired t-test
between the cheating (N=26, mean ± SD, 4.92 ± 3.39) and honesty (N=17,
3 ± 2.45) conditions revealed a significant difference in the number
of matrices reported as being answered between groups: t(37)=2.09, p<0.05.

However, the null hypothesis could not be rejected. The NSA-cheating
condition (N=4, 4.5 ± 1.91) did not statistically differ from the
control-cheating (N=11, 5.18 ±  4.29) condition: t(11.97)=-0.424,
p=0.68. Moreover, the eyes were ineffective in reducing cheating. The
eyes-cheating condition (N=12, 4.82 ± 3.03) did not differ from the
control-cheating condition: t(18)=-0.23, p=0.82.

## Discussion

The failure of this experiment was in allowing for too many
conditions. The honesty condition needed to be much smaller than it
was in order to verify the validity of the experiment. Data collected
for it could not contribute to testing the hypothesis at all, leading
to extremely small sample sizes. The NSA-lying condition was central
to the experiment, and yet only received four participants. However,
the data is not even remotely suggestive that this is an effective way
of priming prosocial behavior. Future research should focus on finding
a more effective way to prime NSA surveillance, and alternative ways to
measure cheating behavior.

## References

Bateson, M., Nettle, D., & Roberts, G. (2006). Cues of being watched
enhance cooperation in a     real-world setting. Biology Letters, 2(3),
412–414. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2006.0509

Ernest-Jones, M., Nettle, D., & Bateson, M. (2011). Effects
of eye images on everyday cooperative     behavior: a field
experiment. Evolution and Human Behavior, 32(3), 172–178.
doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.10.006

Mazar, N., Amir, O., & Ariely, D. (2008). The Dishonesty of Honest People:
A Theory of Self-Concept     Maintenance (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID
979648). Rochester, NY: Social Science Research     Network. Retrieved
from http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=979648

Shariff, A. F., & Norenzayan, A. (2007). God Is Watching You
Priming God Concepts Increases     Prosocial Behavior in an
Anonymous Economic Game. Psychological Science, 18(9), 803–809.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01983.x
