---
layout: post
title: Hillary Clinton's Shattered reads like Kazuo Ishiguro
date: 2017-09-21 22:41:00
tag: books
---

After reading several of Ishiguro's novels, I feel fairly confident in saying that they often feature a narrator who is intensely self-aware and insecure about certain aspects of their social status, yet manage to convince themeselves so utterly that they are integrated into "high society" or whatever their desired company is that it opens up this psychological space for these beautiful magical realist effects to appear. At times I am reminded of a phrase I read in reference to Mo Yan: "hallucinatory realism". There is no solid reality with which to perform magic on. Instead, the narrator's world is revealed to have taken a fundamental misstep, somewhere up the line, like mathematicians who ventured far along before doubt is cast on one of their fundamental axioms. But where did things go wrong? The world around Ishiguro's characters -- colonial Shanghai in When We Were Orphans, the book I read most recently -- transforms so impercetably that it boils them, and the reader, like a frog in a pot. There is no clear point of departure from the world they knew.

Naturally those thoughts echoed in my mind as I read [Shattered](https://www.amazon.com/Shattered-Inside-Hillary-Clintons-Campaign/dp/0553447084). Shattered is the post-mortem of the Hillary Clinton campaign executed by two of her informal biographers, the authors of [HRC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HRC:_State_Secrets_and_the_Rebirth_of_Hillary_Clinton). It depicts a campaign living in a different universe -- a "floating world" if you will -- and the characters perform a shadow-play
across the political landscape. The cast constantly abstracts away from humanity toward these more logical planes: data for Robby Mook, this contemporary politico art of war -- divorced, of course, from the lived reality of the people they would have served -- for the others. The way that Jonathon Allen and Amie Parnes allow themselves the politico vocabulary in their narration -- and more, allowing themselves the politico way of thinking, of "12-dimensional chess", where it makes sense
to "box out" Joe Biden by courting one particular donor to send him a secret signal -- is like that of a Kazuo Ishiguro narrator. They have sunk so deeply into this universe, and assimilated so keenly, that each revelation about Hillary's persistent unpopularity or the contemporary desire for radical socialist ideas is de-realizing.

The instinct of Hillary's campaign, upon first learning of the investigation into her private email server, was to laugh and make jokes about it. In the stark aftermath of the election, I'm reminded of a course I took on the sociology of humor, and the ways that laughter is used to smooth over incongruities in our reality. These incongruities kept surfacing, however, and the campaign attempted deeper and deeper coping mechanisms -- blaming people, in-fighting, and resorting to this cargo cult-y scientism around the analytics team. It is worth mentioning that anytime I mention the "campaign" here, it may as well be "Hillary" since the book makes clear that the problems with acknowledging reality stem from the very top. As Hillary is plummetting in the polls, she retreats to these idyllic scenes that are unreal to most Americans, like the beach or five-star hotels, where she comfortably, and pleasurably, wrestles without insight with her favorite topic: her unpopularity.

The fact that the outcome is predetermined didn't make me desire for different outcomes the whole time. I wanted them to choose Elizabeth Warren -- not because that would necessarily have saved the campaign -- but because I wanted them to be the kind of people who would have considered it. Instead, they did this pseudo-rational process of checking off pros and cons, and came to the conclusion that the most inoffensive result would be Tim Kaine. Those of us who paid attention to the election knew each song and dance in this musical, and in our hearts, we knew exactly what those on top were thinking.

It is because we know the plot ahead of time that the book is so tragic. The only real moment of Hillary Clinton that we glimpse in the entire thing is the night she lost, she seemed like she was in a daze, whenever anyone spoke to her, she would repeat, "Okay. Okay."

The tragic reality of this is that it continues endlessly, of course, since unlike a novel, it doesn't "just end". As the Hillary campaign collapses, we glimpse Robby Mook in the last pages huddling with the communications team to craft a narrative about "Russian interference" that sure enough has come to be a lived epilogue of the book.
Hillary herself came out with a book as well, blaming Bernie Sanders, the women at the Women's March, and well, everyone except herself, for her loss. 

The only justification I can come up with is that they are stumbling around rather like the pianist in The Unconsoled. Surely he was famous in this town, and that folks knew him? Of course, of course, the townspeople all say. They humor him. He doesn't seem to realize how much time has passed.
