---
layout: basic-post
title: A letter on the second anniversary of Nora's crossing
description: A letter on the second anniversary of Nora's crossing
date: 2026-02-24 01:42:00
tag: nora
---

Dear lovely friends,

We're drawing near the second anniversary of Nora's crossing. This is a time of awakening, enlightenment, and fulfillment of purpose. It was on her death day alone that she finally attained freedom from her suffering. It was a difficult journey for both of us to reach this point.

On this day, I welcome you to bring to mind the joy and liberation that she experienced as she crossed over. She would be happy for us to partake in her relief, because it would mean that we have understood her journey, and everything she had to overcome in order to die. I hope you continue to view her suicide as an act of mutinous self-love, rather than despair.

"What should I do to honor Nora today?" There is nothing special that you have to do. Honor yourself, the wisdom in your body, your connection to nature and community. Don't force yourself to do anything, let things arise naturally as an outpouring of your strength. And if you do find yourself speaking out against injustice, or singing with love, I hope you recognize Nora's voice in your lungs.

May your hearts be strong. May you feel held and guided. I know that in your moments of clarity and your moments of need, you will find Nora right there beside you.

(I can be there too, though you might have to call me with your telephone, because I'm a bit more psychically dense.)

With love and gratitude,

Sam
